In the four videos, four, right?
We did, we were talking about different things,
and one of the things that you mentioned is Livewire.
And I would like you to explain a bit what Livewire is.
You know, from the way you describe it,
I thought it's something similar to what Next is doing,
but you told me it's not exactly like that.
So can you explain it more, what is it?
Sure, so, okay, so it came out of a project
in the Elixir ecosystem, or the Phoenix ecosystem,
called Phoenix LiveView.
So back in January, I saw this little demo,
and it was a blog post, and it showed a GIF of a thermostat,
just a UI, a little front-end UI thing.
And the mouse is clicking the plus sign,
and the temperature's going up as the user clicks it.
No page reloads, it looks like JavaScript.
Then after it, it's like, no JavaScript written
to achieve this, or whatever, I don't know.
And so my interest was piqued, like, whoa,
front-end functionality, no JavaScript.
And then they show a little code snippet on this blog post,
and it shows a template that looks like a backend template,
where, remember, like MVC, you pass data into a view.
Your template, yeah.
And then your template is some, like,
PHP templating or something, you echo out something.
So they had that, and the template
echoed out the temperature.
But then there was a button that,
you know in View how you have at-click?
So, or V on click, or whatever, you're
listening for a click event, and then updating some state.
So there was that, except it was Phoenix Click,
and it ran a method that updated state
in the backend, what looked like a controller.
And then somehow it re-rendered the whole thing,
passed it all back to the front-end, all in real-time
over WebSockets, and then diffs the front-end
and updates the front-end.
So it's pretty trippy.
But from the user's perspective, you're
writing a component that has a very blurry line between front-end
and back-end, because your state is managed in the back-end,
and you're used to that being stateless,
controller-type thing.
But your templating is handled in the front-end,
and you're using, basically, front-end template directives,
like you would in Vue.js.
If you peek under the hood, how it works
is there's basically a JavaScript portion.
Engine or something, yeah.
Yeah.
There's a JavaScript engine, and there's a back-end engine.
And in Phoenix, they use WebSockets,
because Phoenix Elixir is great at this real-time Phoenix
channels.
So there's a long-running instance in the back-end.
And then your long-running front-end instance,
because that's just JavaScript.
And so there's a listener on a button, let's say.
So the user clicks that, and in the background,
it fires off an Ajax request.
Well, sorry, a WebSockets.
Yeah.
And says, hey, update the state to this.
Rerender the template.
Give me the DOM back.
And then the front-end does a DOM diff and says,
what's on the page, and what did I get back from the server?
Swap the difference so that you're not
wrecking state, whatever, like focus input.
So change the front-end, and now it feels reactive.
So honestly, it works just like ReactorView,
except they keep track of a virtual DOM and a render
function, and they do the diffing in review.
It just happens really fast.
So this is actually making round-trip to the server
and deferring the whole state tracking portion of it
and template rendering portion of it to the back-end.
To the engine, yeah.
Yeah.
Does that make sense?
Yeah, it makes sense.
OK.
Now I have the question, how far can this go?
OK, for a simple example, it seems to be working.
But how far, how much complexity you
can get into this kind of system where it has to do a diff?
Or maybe it's like, this is an idea, right?
But then maybe some optimization will get it.
I mean, when React started, everyone was like, whoa,
you want to update only parts of the DOM,
and how would you do that?
And now it's working very well, and everyone is doing it.
So what do you think?
Yeah, so I guess it depends on what you mean by complexity.
So let's say performance.
So right now, it's making a server round-trip
for every change you make.
Where Vue.js or React, it's instant.
It goes through this whole tick, and then it's done.
That part, there's a limit.
WebSockets make it a lot faster.
PHP is not there with WebSockets.
There is asynchronous PHP, and there's a lot out there.
But if I wrote Livewire and based it
on asynchronous WebSocket stuff, I
would be limiting the user base by like 90%,
because people would have to manage a WebSocket server
in PHP, which is hard.
So I use Ajax, and we can talk a little bit about that later.
But basically, there's a limit for me
of how fast these interactions can be done.
So that is.
The limit is because you can't use only WebSockets.
Well, even if I use WebSockets, you still
have to go from Tokyo to New York
if your server's in New York.
But anyway, imagine that functionality.
That's to make the setup.
That temperature up.
Yeah, yeah.
You click on the button.
Yep.
OK?
Imagine this state is somewhere in some server, right?
Yeah, yeah.
Right.
Even if React will update the interface right away,
because it should still send that kind of request
to somewhere to update that state, right?
Yep.
So you're equal here.
Yes.
Which part will be slower on your side with LiveWire?
So LiveWire has to go back to the server,
because the state's on the server,
and then back to the front end before anything updates.
Before anything updates, that's the thing.
In some cases, yeah.
Yeah.
OK.
Because it's the server that will be sending the DOM?
The server's sending the DOM.
The server handles the template rendering,
so you have to wait for the full round trip
to get the rendered DOM.
OK.
So are you now like, this is a live project?
You're working on it?
Yeah.
Yeah?
I basically quit my job 10 months ago
to go on a sabbatical for two months.
And two days into it, I started this project.
And I just haven't stopped.
So it's been.
So you have users?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, it's like 1,000-something stars on GitHub.
I launched it at Laracon, the Laravel conference
in June, and that's when I made the repo public.
So do you see people doing what kind of apps
people are doing with Livewire?
Yeah.
So the thing is, a lot of the need that I'm trying to solve
is all that complexity that I'm talking about,
this two systems, view SPA, all that, a lot of times
is so that you can show a loading spinner while you're
deferring some loading, maybe do some real-time searching,
sorting a data table, autosaving a form.
Like in reality, the nature of apps, as I see it,
the average application that a developer is working on
is a bunch of forms and tables.
Like maybe there's some extra interactions here and there,
but we're not all working on Twitter.
We're working on applications with forms and tables
and some interactions.
But for the most part, that's what I would say it is.
So it's a lot of heavy lifting to live search
through a list of posts, to have live pagination,
to search through a data table, to expand a row in a table
and make it editable, stuff like that.
So Livewire fits these use cases perfectly
because you were already sending AJAX requests before.
Like in the case of a real-time searching field,
that's a perfect example, like a Hello World.
Like you have an input element.
So let's do it the Vue.js way.
You have an onChange or something, or onInput.
So as you type, you debounce an input and send it
to the server and you get whatever JSON results back,
and then you template it on the front end.
So with Livewire, it does the same thing.
It's listening for the input event
and you would define it like that.
And it's sending the request to the server,
except it's doing the templating on the backend
and then sending the full HTML to the front end
instead of just JSON.
Can't you argue that it can be faster on the search?
Some instances it can be faster
and there's some, but in one specific way
it can be a lot faster is you can cache templates
on the backend and share them between users.
And you're not doing any CPU on,
much less CPU on the client, right?
But I'll say performance-wise,
there's enough give and take that I don't,
I'm not going around and preaching about this
because it's gonna make your applications faster.
It's gonna make you faster as a developer.
Okay, it's more about the productivity.
Productivity and just app reliability in general
because you can write tests, you can write Livewire tests
and test this functionality all in backend code.
So if I was writing that auto-search component in Livewire,
in the view example,
you'd have to test all the API endpoint stuff.
You'd have to test all the view stuff, right?
And then mock the difference between the two.
With Livewire, you can write one test in the backend
that says, init the component, type this into the search
or set the search state to hello world,
assert that I don't see hello world in the rendered HTML
or assert that I do see hello world in the rendered HTML.
Okay, so now that,
so can you give me please some examples,
like maybe five, six examples of things
you can do easily with Livewire?
Like, I don't know, you told me,
for instance, you gave an example of the search.
That's one example.
Can you give us some other examples
so that people can project,
oh yeah, this is what I need for my app and that's enough?
Yeah, a very simple one is deferred loading.
So this is one, I just, the talk,
I just gave at Fullstack EU, it'll be online.
This is sort of the project, the-
We'll link to it in the-
That would be great.
In the description.
Yeah, and I walked through this deferred loading problem
because I had been resisting the complexity of JavaScript
for a little bit, maybe two years ago,
trying not to pull in view.
But then I was creating an invoices page
and I needed to pull invoices from Stripe.
And like, I'm not gonna, you know,
make my users spend three seconds
waiting for the whole page to load.
So I'll need to pull in view, make a loading spinner,
send an Ajax request, get the JSON.
But I found this pattern in the Rails community.
I'm calling it server fetched partials,
but the concept is send the Ajax request,
but just fetch HTML,
fetch a partial from an endpoint instead of JSON,
and then swap it into the page.
Which by the way, that's the fundamental pattern
behind all of these tools.
LiveWire, LiveView is this concept
of rendering small pieces in the backend.
So anyway, this deferred loading example
is a perfect case for LiveWire
that you could very easily come back to the server
and get your template with LiveWire.
Where is your coding simple?
You're just getting this from Stripe and serving it.
But it will behave in the right way.
And the backend code you're writing
is mostly the stuff that you'd normally
be putting inside a controller.
So yeah, simple code, but it behaves
the way you want it to behave in the user experience.
And your templates can use your backend templating language.
They are backend templates.
So they can fetch stuff from the database if you want.
You have direct access, it's all private authorization,
user auth, stuff like that that's hard on the front end
is taken care of.
And SEO, because it's all backend templates,
it renders statically from the first run.
Any other examples?
So auto-saving a form, that's a great example.
You're typing into a form and you want it,
or real-time validation.
These are things that are very easy.
So in Laravel, I guess the default way to validate
is a full form submission, do the validation,
redirect back with some flash session data
and show the error.
So you can use actually Laravel's validator utilities
in your LiveWire component so that as you're typing,
it'll just validate on every,
it has debouncing functionality
so you can set a debounce on the typing.
But that's all the validation on the server?
Yeah, all the, on the server real-time using the same.
That's the thing, using the same validation rules.
The same validation rules.
So you don't have to duplicate them.
No duplicate validation, exactly.
That's cool because.
And your same template.
So your validation backend template,
if you have a backend, just a static one,
it's the same exact template.
You could use the same include.
Because that you see it often on some apps.
Because there is front-end code and backend code,
if your thing happens to validate on the server side,
then even the message might change or the style can change.
And it's like, it's weird.
Why this message is different
from the other message that I got.
So there are two kinds.
And that's the best case if it's handled well.
If not, it's just a whoop, something went wrong.
Or you know.
Yeah, these kind of things, yeah.
And this way you're coherent in both ways.
Yep, exactly.
It's a make more things the same.
It's keeping it all in one place.
Yeah.
So it's Laravel, right?
Livewire is for Laravel, yes.
Yeah.
But there is JavaScript,
but you don't code in JavaScript.
So, I mean, Livewire is like 60% JavaScript actually.
So I spend most of my time writing JavaScript.
So that no one else can have to write.
But it actually, it provides you with some utilities
if you wanna bring your own JavaScript.
So.
Kind of extensions to.
So it gives you an API out of the box.
So from your JavaScript,
you can call on your Livewire components.
You could use, it actually supports Vue.js right now.
So you could just use a Vue component inside of Livewire
and bind to a Vue component that uses V,
or like V model in a Vue component.
You could do wire model.
Basically Livewire syntax is almost exactly like Vue syntax.
So it's very similar.
So you can kind of mix front end components
with these Livewire components.
But basically what I would do
if I was making an app right now,
if I wanted to like a specific input element
that had to be reactive,
like not go to the server and back reactive,
like JavaScript reactive,
I would probably make a web, like a web component,
or make a React component and wrap it in a web component,
or a Vue component and wrap it in a web component,
or write a little bit of vanilla JS in a script tag
and do that.
Yeah.
So then there's something,
and you made me think of something.
So basically you described it in another video,
you described that bringing components to the server.
So server side components.
Yeah, server side components, yeah.
So there's a thing, a story,
and it's a real story that with Prismic,
when we started Prismic,
we didn't have React or anything like that.
It was very early.
And so we wanted to write things
into some kind of component model,
but we didn't have React.
And it wasn't me, it was someone else on the project.
His name is Guillaume.
Anyway, he had to do a system where we render partials.
Basically we had these kind of templates.
They were Scala templates.
And whenever you change something,
it will go and fetch only the part
that is responsible of that part of the screen alone.
It will not fetch the whole thing.
And now we've been spending like two years
into moving away from that into components.
Now if you tell me that the story,
now we will have to go back to it.
You ever, on GitHub, if you go to GitHub
and you open your dev tools,
and you inspect the XHR requests,
everything you do, this is all over GitHub.
Like GitHub works this way.
You hover over, if you go to the issues tab
and you hover over like a author searching or something,
it'll send an AJAX request,
fetch the partial that's gonna be shown
when you click on it, and then it's gonna show it.
They do it, like everything in GitHub is done this way.
50% I guess of Prismic right now is running that way.
That's interesting.
I was poking around your AJAX requests
because I was typing in the name of a custom type,
and as I was typing, it was kind of showing me the name,
but formatted.
There was a little lag and I thought, are they doing this?
But it was just JSON.
It depends on screens.
Some screens we already migrated into React app
because mostly because there are more developers,
front end developers working on that.
And we used our own framework back then.
But more than 50%, I guess, Prismic is still running that way.
Nice.
That's funny.
So we'll go back to it.
Yeah, go back to it.
Thank you very much.
Absolutely.